
--- PAGE 1 ---
70 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017
Vehicle Routing Problems for Drone Delivery
Kevin Dorling, Student Member, IEEE, Jordan Heinrichs, Geoffrey G. Messier, Member, IEEE,
and Sebastian Magierowski, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones, have the
potential to signiﬁcantly reduce the cost and time of making
last-mile deliveries and responding to emergencies. Despite this
potential, little work has gone into developing vehicle rout-
ing problems (VRPs) speciﬁcally for drone delivery scenarios.
Existing VRPs are insufﬁcient for planning drone deliveries:
either multiple trips to the depot are not permitted, leading to
solutions with excess drones, or the effect of battery and payload
weight on energy consumption is not considered, leading to costly
or infeasible routes. We propose two multitrip VRPs for drone
delivery that address both issues. One minimizes costs subject
to a delivery time limit, while the other minimizes the overall
delivery time subject to a budget constraint. We mathematically
derive and experimentally validate an energy consumption model
for multirotor drones, demonstrating that energy consumption
varies approximately linearly with payload and battery weight.
We use this approximation to derive mixed integer linear pro-
grams for our VRPs. We propose a cost function that considers
our energy consumption model and drone reuse, and apply it
in a simulated annealing (SA) heuristic for ﬁnding suboptimal
solutions to practical scenarios. To assist drone delivery practi-
tioners with balancing cost and delivery time, the SA heuristic
is used to show that the minimum cost has an inverse exponen-
tial relationship with the delivery time limit, and the minimum
overall delivery time has an inverse exponential relationship with
the budget. Numerical results conﬁrm the importance of reusing
drones and optimizing battery size in drone delivery VRPs.
Index Terms —Delivery, drone, heuristic, mixed integer pro-
gram (MIP), simulated annealing (SA), traveling salesman prob-
lem (TSP), unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V), vehicle routing
problem (VRP).
I. I NTRODUCTION
U
NMANNED aerial vehicles (UA Vs), or drones, have
the potential to signiﬁcantly reduce the cost and time
required to deliver packages. In general, drones are less
expensive to maintain than traditional delivery vehicles such
as trucks, and can lower labor costs by performing tasks
autonomously. Delivering with drones may be faster than
delivering with traditional delivery vehicles, as drones are not
Manuscript received January 18, 2016; revised April 6, 2016; accepted
June 4, 2016. Date of publication July 14, 2016; date of current version
December 14, 2016. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada under Grant PGSD3-443041-2013.
This paper was recommended by Associate Editor S. Nahavandi.
K. Dorling, J. Heinrichs, and G. G. Messier are with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Calgary, Calgary AB T2N 1N4, Canada (e-mail: kudorlin@ucalgary.ca;
jheinric@ucalgary.ca; gmessier@ucalgary.ca).
S. Magierowski is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, York University, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada (e-mail:
magiero@cse.yorku.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSMC.2016.2582745
limited by established infrastructure such as roads, and gen-
erally face less complex obstacle avoidance scenarios. The
application of drones in emergency situations has the potential
to save lives: drones can transport much-needed water, food,
and medical supplies over hazardous terrain during a crisis,
and can deploy wireless sensors to provide immediate updates
on the event. This makes drones suitable not only for parcel
delivery, but also for emergency response in the event of forest
ﬁres, oil spills, and earthquakes.
A number of large organizations have shown interest in
drone delivery. In 2013, Amazon announced Prime Air [ 1], a
service that utilizes multirotor drones to deliver packages from
Amazon to customers. German logistics company Deutsche
Post DHL also started its Parcelcopter project in 2013; the
Parcelcopter [2] has transported medicine to the island of Juist
in the North Sea. Google revealed Project Wing [ 3] in 2014 to
produce drones that can deliver larger items than Prime Air and
Parcelcopter. In 2014, the United Arab Emirates announced
their plan to use drones to distribute ofﬁcial government doc-
uments such as permits and ID cards [ 4]. A startup called
Matternet has partnered with Swiss Post to test a lightweight
package delivery quadcopter [ 5].
Developments in numerous technologies have made it
feasible for these organizations to perform drone deliver-
ies. Carbon ﬁber manufacturing costs have decreased from
25 to 10 $/kg over the last 20 years [ 6], [ 7], enabling the
development of strong, lightweight airframes. Lithium poly-
mer batteries, with their relatively high energy density [ 8],
have improved the ﬂight times of UA Vs compared to alter-
native technologies such as nickel-cadmium and nickel-metal
hydride. Drones typically use GPS to determine their location,
and are able to take advantage of differential GPS [ 9] and
localization techniques [ 10] to improve accuracy. Obstacles
can be avoided through techniques such as light detection and
ranging [ 11] and image processing [ 12]. Architectures and
protocols have been developed that enable drones to form ad-
hoc networks [ 13] and to wirelessly communicate with other
entities [14].
Even though signiﬁcant effort has gone into developing
drone delivery technology, challenges unique to planning
drone deliveries, such as the limited ﬂight range and carrying
capacity of drones, have been neglected in comparison. The
ﬂying sidekick traveling salesman problem (FSTSP) [ 15]p r o -
vides one solution by allowing delivery trucks to also deploy
drones, but relies on a combined ﬂeet of trucks and drones to
make deliveries. Green vehicle routing problems (GVRPs) [16]
may account for battery-powered vehicles, but appear to be
designed with trucks or other large capacity vehicles in mind.
2168-2216 c⃝ 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
DORLING et al.: VRPs FOR DRONE DELIVERY 71
Drones have much smaller carrying capacities than trucks,
and have limited ﬂight times, meaning that in general they
can only carry a small number of packages per route. The
GVRP does not allow multiple trips to the depot, so as drone
capacity and the maximum travel time decrease, it would
likely compensate by unnecessarily purchasing more drones
even though they could have been reused. We therefore pro-
pose solving drone delivery problems (DDPs) with a multitrip
VRP (MTVRP) [17] that compensates for each drone’s limited
carrying capacity by reusing drones when possible.
The main contribution of this paper is the development of
MTVRPs that consider battery and payload weight when cal-
culating energy consumption. Other MTVRPs do not appear
to account for battery and payload weight, limiting their appli-
cability in drone delivery and emergency response scenarios.
In Section VI-A, we experimentally show that increasing
battery and payload weight can noticeably increase energy
consumption, which in turn reduces ﬂight time. Optimizing
battery weight is important for drones: a drone’s battery con-
sumes a large portion of its carrying capacity, meaning that
increasing its battery size to extend ﬂight time signiﬁcantly
reduces the capacity available for packages. Approaches that
consider the effect of payload weight on energy consumption
have been shown in [ 18] to reduce costs in capacitated vehi-
cle routing problems (CVRPs) compared to approaches that do
not. Balancing payload weight, battery weight, and ﬂight time
are important considerations when attempting to minimize the
cost or the delivery time for drone deliveries.
In addition to developing MTVRPs for drone delivery, we
are the ﬁrst to derive and experimentally validate a linear
energy consumption model for multirotor drones. We demon-
strate that energy consumption increases at an approximately
linear rate with battery and payload weight. While others have
developed models for large vehicles, we are not aware of any
that exist for battery-powered drones. Our experiments not
only validate our energy consumption model, but also demon-
strate that drones consume approximately the same power
regardless of being in hover or ﬂying at a constant speed.
We will show that this considerably simpliﬁes our MTVRPs.
Our linear energy consumption model lets us derive mixed
integer linear programs (MILPs) for solving the drone delivery
MTVRPs. A linear energy consumption model allows for linear
energy consumption constraints, which are required to derive
an MILP compatible with fast commercial solvers such as
CPLEX [19]. These problems optimize the number of drones,
the routes they ﬂy, as well as their battery weight, payload
weight, and energy consumption. One VRP minimizes the cost
of making the deliveries and is referred to as the minimum cost
DDP (MC-DDP). Alternatively, in the case of an emergency
response situation, a company may want to minimize overall
delivery time, deﬁned as the time it takes to complete all package
deliveries; we call this the minimum time DDP (MT-DDP).
We refer to the problems collectively as the DDPs.
As MILPs are NP-hard, large instances (in our case, scenar-
ios with a large number of locations) may take a signiﬁcant
amount of time to solve. For such cases, we derive a simulated
annealing (SA) heuristic for ﬁnding suboptimal solutions to
the DDPs within a limited runtime. To help delivery network
planners understand how the DDPs behave under different con-
ditions, we perform a sensitivity analysis to show how the
optimal cost and overall delivery time found by the MC-DDP
and MT-DDP, respectively, vary with the size of the area of
interest, the number of locations considered, and the restric-
tions placed on the budget or overall delivery time. The SA
heuristic is applied to demonstrate the importance of perform-
ing multiple trips and optimizing battery weight: VRPs that
do not make such considerations may ﬁnd costly or infeasible
solutions to the DDPs.
While our DDPs allow for multiple deliveries per route, it is
not clear if delivery companies such as Amazon and DHL are
interested in delivering to more than one customer per route.
The Amazon Prime Air website [ 1] and the DHL Parcelcopter
press release [2] only show drones that can deliver single pack-
ages. Even if these companies only plan to deliver to one
customer per route, our VRPs can be viewed as a generaliza-
tion of this strategy. Constraints can be added to our problem
to limit the number of customers per route. Furthermore, our
method can be used to see if the savings from considering
multiple deliveries per route make up for the costs associated
with implementing the strategy.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we review work relevant to the DDPs. Section III describes
our energy consumption model for multirotor copters. In
Section IV, we provide MILP implementations of the DDPs,
while in Section V we propose an SA heuristic for ﬁnding
suboptimal solutions to the problems within a constrained run-
time. Section VI presents experimental results validating the
fuel consumption model, evaluates the performance of our SA
heuristic, and analyzes numerical results to gain insight on the
DDPs. Our conclusions are provided in Section VII.
II. R
ELATED WORK
Drone routing papers, such as [ 20] and [21], typically focus
on surveillance applications. The FSTSP [ 15] considers a
delivery scenario based on combining drone delivery with a
delivery truck. There do not appear to be papers that focus
solely on using drones to make deliveries. This existing work
on drone routing ignores factors important to drone delivery
such as vehicle capacity, battery weight, changing payload
weight, and reusing vehicles to reduce costs.
VRPs [22], [23] have been applied to solve delivery prob-
lems that, at ﬁrst glance, appear similar to the DDPs proposed
in this paper. A VRP attempts to ﬁnd the optimal routes for one
or more vehicles to deliver commodities to a set of locations.
Each location may have a unique demand representing the
number or size of commodities it requires, or a time window
in which the vehicle should arrive. Vehicles typically leave
from one or more depots, deliver their commodities, and then
return to the depots. This section will explain why existing
VRPs are not adequate for the DDP.
The GVRP, ﬁrst described by Erdo ˘gan and
Miller-Hooks [ 16], allows vehicles to visit refuelling
stations while making deliveries to extend their range.
Schneider et al. [24] created a version for battery-powered
delivery vehicles that considers time windows, capacity
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
72 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017
constraints, and location demands. Hiermann et al. [25] built
on Schneider et al. ’s [ 24]w o r kb ya l l o w i n gf o ram i x e d
ﬂeet of various types of vehicles, perhaps with different
capacities, battery sizes, and costs. They assume that charging
infrastructure is in place, so vehicles can regain energy to
extend their travel distance. While it could increase drone
range, it is debatable whether delivery companies will deploy
charging infrastructure for their drones, and unlikely that
such infrastructure would be available in emergency response
situations. In GVRPs, vehicles can visit the same charging
station multiple times to restore energy, but appear to be able
to visit the depot only once. Drones tend to have limited
carrying capacities, so if the depot can only be visited once, a
GVRP will likely require a large number of drones to satisfy
every customer’s demand. In Section VI-D, we show that
reusing drones by allowing them to make multiple trips can
signiﬁcantly reduce costs.
A VRP that reuses vehicles is known as a multi-
trip vehicle routing problem (MTVRP), ﬁrst proposed by
Fleischmann [26]. While a number of approaches are available
for solving the MTVRP, such as a large neighborhood search
algorithm [27], a hybrid genetic algorithm with a local search
operator [28], a variable neighborhood search algorithm [ 29],
and a branch-and-price algorithm [ 30], none appear to con-
sider energy consumption as a function of vehicle weight.
Routes found by the above approaches may be infeasible or
unnecessarily costly in a drone delivery scenario, with bat-
teries that are larger than necessary or too heavy to carry. In
Section VI-E, we demonstrate that optimizing battery weight
can reduce costs. Battery weight cannot be optimized without
modeling energy consumption as a function of vehicle weight:
the model is used to ﬁnd the battery energy, and therefore
weight, required to complete each route. The DDPs proposed
in this paper apply our linear energy consumption model to
optimize battery weight and payload weight, ensuring that the
routes found are low-cost and feasible.
Our DDPs consider payload weight similar to the
energy minimizing vehicle routing problem introduced by
Kara et al. [31]. Kara et al. [31] utilized a VRP that fac-
tors in the effect of a vehicle’s payload on total costs, but is
based solely on Newtonian physics, and is not veriﬁed against
an actual vehicle. Unlike [ 31] ,t h ew o r kb yX i a oet al. [18]
provides a linear fuel consumption model for trucks based on
actual fuel consumption measurements from [ 32], along with
an SA algorithm for minimizing the cost of routes. The load
dependant VRP [33] provides a local search heuristic for doing
the same in pickup and delivery scenarios. While these VRPs
consider the effect of payload weight on energy consumption,
they appear to have been designed with vehicles that have
relatively large capacities in mind, as they only let vehicles
depart from the depot once. Drones have a limited carrying
capacity, so if they can only leave the depot once, a large
number will be required to satisfy demand in scenarios with
many customers. To reduce the number and therefore cost of
drones, we reuse them after they return to the depot.
The DDPs proposed in this paper combine MTVRPs with
VRPs that model energy consumption as a function of vehicle
weight to gain the strengths of both approaches. As mentioned
earlier, MTVRPs reduce drone costs by reusing drones after
they return to the depot, but can propose routes that are costly
or infeasible. VRPs that model energy consumption as a func-
tion of vehicle weight, on the other hand, ensure that individual
routes are feasible and low-cost, but do not reuse vehicles to
lower costs. The DDPs reduce drone costs by reusing vehi-
cles and ensure low-cost, feasible routes by modeling energy
consumption as a function of battery and payload weight.
III. M
ULTIROTOR HELICOPTER ENERGY CONSUMPTION
The ﬂight time of a drone is limited by its weight and the
energy stored in its battery. An energy consumption model
helps balance the two by providing the energy consumed by
the drone as a function of its weight. When optimizing deliver-
ies, such a model can be used to compare the energy consumed
by alternative routes.
While energy consumption equations are available for single
rotor helicopters [ 34], to the best of our knowledge no such
equations are available for multirotor helicopters, the type of
drone that most delivery companies appear to favor. In this
section, we derive an equation for the power consumed by
a multirotor helicopter in hover as a function of its weight.
We show that the power it consumes is approximately linearly
proportional to the weight of its battery and payload under
practical assumptions.
We derive the power consumed by a multirotor drone in
hover, but not during ﬂight, takeoff, or landing. In ﬂight,
the power consumed by the helicopter is often reduced due
to translational lift [ 34], a phenomena where air ﬂowing
horizontally along the rotor generates additional lift. The aver-
age power during hover is consequently an upper bound on
the average power during ﬂight. We assume that the power
consumed during takeoff and landing is, on average, approx-
imately equivalent to the power consumed during hover. We
conﬁrm in Section VI-A that these assumptions are realistic
with a 3D Robotics ArduCopter Hexa-B hexacopter.
From [ 34, eq. (2.16)], we can calculate the power P
∗ in
Watts of a single rotor helicopter in hover, with the thrust T
in Newtons, ﬂuid density of air ρ in kg/m3, and the area ς of
the spinning blade disc in m 2 using
P∗ = T3/2
√ 2ρς (1)
where the thrust T = (W + m)g, given the frame weight W
in kg, the battery and payload weight m in kg, and gravity
g in N.
We can use ( 1) to derive an equation for the power con-
s u m e db ya nn-rotor copter if we assume that each rotor shares
the total mass W + m of the copter equally. Each rotor carries
a weight of m′ = m/n for batteries and payload, and a frame
weight of W′ = W/n, meaning that the power consumed by a
single rotor is
P′ =
(
W′ + m′)3/2
√
g3
2ρς.
So the power consumed by all n rotors is
P = nP′ = (W + m)3/2
√
g3
2ρςn. (2)
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
DORLING et al.: VRPs FOR DRONE DELIVERY 73
0 1 2 30
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Battery and Payload Weight m (kg)
Power (kW)
 
 
Equation (2)
Approximation (3)
Fig. 1. Linear approximation ( 3) ﬁtted to the power consumption model ( 2),
assuming n = 6 rotors, a ﬂuid density of ρ = 1.204 kg/m3, a rotor disc area
of ς = 0.2m 2, and a frame weight W = 1.5 kg.
Note that the inverse relationship between P and n seen in (2)
is a result of n increasing the effective disc area.
The linear approximation of the n-rotor copter power con-
sumption equation ( 2) can be expressed as
p(m) = αm + β (3)
where α represents the power consumed per kilogram of bat-
tery and payload weight m, and β is the power required to
keep the hexacopter frame in the air. In Section IV,w eu s e( 3)
to develop MILPs for optimizing the routes ﬂown by a set
of drones to minimize the time and cost required to deliver
packages to a set of locations. We will see that the linear
approximation is necessary for the constraints in the MILPs
to be linear. Linear constraints ensure compatibility with the
majority of mixed integer program (MIP) solvers available.
Fig. 1 shows that ( 3) closely ﬁts ( 2), assuming a Hexa-B
hexacopter such that n = 6, ρ = 1.204 kg/m
3, ς = 0.2m 2,
and W = 1.5 kg. Applying a linear regression to ( 2)f o r m =
0–3 kg in increments of 0.001 kg results in α = 46.7W / k g
and β = 26.9 W. Our linear approximation ( 3) closely ﬁts the
exact equation (2), with a mean percent error of 3.1% and the
largest difference being 6.3 W. In Section VI-A, we validate
this approximation experimentally with a Hexa-B hexacopter.
The linear approximation will likely hold for other multiro-
tor helicopters. The parameters n, ς, ρ, and W are presumably
similar between helicopters and are all under a square root
in (2), meaning slight adjustments to them will have a limited
impact on P. A larger variation in m, however, can signiﬁ-
cantly reduce the accuracy of the approximation: if m varies
between 0 and 10 kg, the mean percent error becomes 12.8%,
and the largest difference between ( 2) and ( 3) is about 51 W.
IV . D
RONE DELIVERY PROBLEMS
In this section, we apply ( 3) to develop MILPs for opti-
mizing the number of drones in a ﬂeet, as well as the routes
they ﬂy, in order to solve the DDPs. When the objective is
to minimize costs, we refer to the problem as the MC-DDP.
A company that specializes in delivering parcels may prior-
itize cost minimization over time. In an emergency response
situation, however, a company could instead prioritize time,
and would consequently solve the MT-DDP. In both DDPs,
constraints on the budget B and delivery time limit T may be
imposed.
Fig. 2. Example showing two drones ﬂying three different routes.
We deﬁne a route as a path that starts and ends at the
depot. The example given in Fig. 2 depicts two drones ﬂy-
ing three routes. Whilst drone 2 ﬂies a single route, visiting
locations 4–7, drone 1 ﬂies two routes. During its ﬁrst route,
drone 1 visits locations 1–3, then returns to the depot to swap
batteries and pick up more packages. After the swap, it ﬂies
its second route, visiting locations 8–10. We assume that only
one depot exists in the area. The depot acts like a charging
station: each vehicle may return to the depot multiple times
to collect more packages and replace its batteries. The DDPs
optimize the routes ﬂown by a set of drones in order to deliver
packages to a set of locations N . Location 0 is the depot. Each
location i ∈ N
0, where the set N0 = N\0, has a demand Di
which represents the weight of the package in kg that will be
delivered to location i. Every location, except for the depot, is
visited only once by a drone, and τ s is spent at each location
to descend, deliver the package, and ascend.
The rest of this section is dedicated to explaining our
assumptions and deriving the MILP forms of the MT-DDP
and MC-DDP. We discuss our assumptions in Section IV-A.
In Section IV-B, we list the constraints and decision variables
used in the DDPs. Section IV-C provides each DDP’s objective
function and MILP formulation.
A. Assumptions
This section explains the assumptions we make regarding
drone ﬂight speed, battery charging, and the number of depots.
We assume that drones ﬂy between locations at a constant
speed v in m/s. In Section VI-A, we demonstrate that while
the energy consumed by a hexacopter during ﬂight is approx-
imately the same as the energy consumed during hover, the
energy consumed during ﬂight can actually be slightly lower
than the energy consumed in hover, likely due to translational
lift. We therefore assume that the operator would ﬂy drones
as fast as they reasonably can, at a constant speed of v m/s
between locations.
Note that one weakness of this assumption is that it ignores
the impact of weather. Flying with the wind, for example,
could reduce energy consumption. Cold temperatures may
adversely affect battery performance until the batteries warm
up. For the sake of generality, we ignore the effects of weather.
Understanding how hexacopter speed and energy consumption
are affected by the weather would likely require additional
measurements in different weather conditions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
74 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017
We assume that the demand at each location can be fully
satisﬁed by a single drone. If the demand at a location is higher
than the drone carrying capacity, the DDPs do not make mul-
tiple drones deliver optimally to that location. To overcome
this issue, multiple locations can be placed on top of one
another. Their combined demand can then be higher than the
drone’s carrying capacity. While this does not necessarily ﬁnd
the optimal split, it at least lets drones complete the delivery.
We do not consider recharging batteries after they have
been swapped out of a drone when calculating energy costs.
Instead we assume that the operator will purchase enough fully
charged batteries to satisfy drone energy requirements before
deliveries commence. For a delivery company, managing the
charging of various battery sizes between trips could be dif-
ﬁcult and costly compared to allowing the batteries to charge
overnight. In addition, batteries have a limited number of
charge cycles, so charging them between trips would likely not
provide long-term savings, as they would have to be replaced
more frequently. Disaster management scenarios require low
response times, limiting charging time between trips.
We do not consider multiple depots. While doing so could
extend the range of the drones and potentially save money, we
believe considering multiple depots for drone delivery would
be handled better in a separate paper that discusses optimizing
the number of depots, their distribution over an area, as well
as the allocation of batteries and packages among them. The
survey paper [ 35] discusses VRPs for multiple depots.
B. Decision Variables and Constraints
This section discusses the decision variables, constants,
and constraints used in the DDPs. The DDPs have identi-
cal constraints, which can be organized into categories related
to limiting each drone’s route, reusability, timing, energy
consumption, capacity, as well as the total cost of mak-
ing deliveries. Decision variables and constants are described
below their corresponding constraints.
We ensure that every route is valid through
∑
j∈N
i̸=j
xij = 1 ∀i ∈ N0 (4a)
∑
j∈N
i̸=j
xij −
∑
j∈N
i̸=j
xji = 0 ∀i ∈ N. (4b)
To create a routing map for the drones, we use the edge vari-
ables xij, where xij = 1 if the drone moves from location i
to j, and xij = 0 otherwise. Constraint ( 4a) guarantees that
every location, except for the depot, is visited exactly once by
a drone, while ( 4b) ensures that a drone arriving at location i
also departs from location i.
The reusability constraints
∑
j∈N0
σij ≤ xi0 ∀i ∈ N0 (5a)
∑
j∈N0
σji ≤ x0i ∀i ∈ N0 (5b)
∑
i∈N0
x0i −
∑
(i,j)∈N0×N0
i̸=j
σij ≤ M (5c)
determine whether or not a drone can be reused after returning
to the depot. The reuse decision variable is σij, where σij = 1
if the drone leaves location i for the depot, gains a fresh bat-
tery and set of packages, then ﬂies to location j to begin a
new route; otherwise σij = 0. Constraint ( 5a) implies that if a
drone returns to the depot from location i, it is available for use
again to ﬂy to another location. Constraint (5b) ensures that if a
reused drone leaves from the depot to location i, it arrived pre-
viously from another location. The number of drones that can
be purchased, and can therefore ﬂy simultaneously, is limited
to M by (5c).
We apply the demand constraints
∑
j∈N
i̸=j
yji −
∑
j∈N
i̸=j
yij = Di ∀i ∈ N0 (6a)
yij ≤ Kxij ∀(i, j) ∈ N × N, i ̸= j (6b)
to ensure that each location receives what it demands. The
payload weight between locations i and j is represented by
the decision variable yij in kg. The constant K is a large value
representing an upper bound for constraints. Constraint ( 6a)
makes sure that the payload weight when leaving location i is
Di kg less than upon arrival. Constraint ( 6b) sets the payload
weight of each edge without a vehicle to 0 kg.
We calculate and enforce timing through
ti − tj + τ+ dij/v ∀(i, j) ∈ N × N0 (7a)
≤ K
(
1 − xij
)
i ̸= j
ti − ai + τ+ di0/v ∀i ∈ N0 (7b)
≤ K(1 − xi0)
ai − tj + τ+ d0j/v ∀(i, j) ∈ N0 × N0 (7c)
≤ K
(
1 − σij
)
i ̸= j
ti ≤ l ∀i ∈ N0 (7d)
l ≤ T. (7e)
A location i ∈ N0 is visited by a drone at time ti in seconds.
The time in seconds that a drone returns to the depot directly
after leaving location i is ai. Note that ai = 0i f xi0 = 0,
and ai > 0 otherwise. The overall delivery time l is the time
in seconds when all drones have completed their deliveries.
Constant values related to timing include the speed v in m/s
of the drones in the air, the distance dij in m between locations
i and j,a sw e l la st h et i m eτ in seconds spent at each loca-
tion descending, delivering a package, and ascending. Drones
must complete their deliveries by the delivery time limit T
in seconds. Constraint ( 7a) keeps track of the time ti that
each location i is visited by a drone. Similarly, ( 7b) keeps
track of the time ai that a drone arrives at the depot from
location i. Constraint ( 7c) ensures that times are correct for
drones that are reused after returning to the depot. The overall
delivery time l is set by ( 7d), and the delivery time limit T is
guaranteed by ( 7e).
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
DORLING et al.: VRPs FOR DRONE DELIVERY 75
Carrying capacity is restricted through
qij + yij ≤ Qxij ∀(i, j) ∈ N × N (8a)
i ̸= j
zi/ξ− ζi ≤ K(1 − xi0) ∀i ∈ N0 (8b)
ζi − ζj ≤ K
(
1 − xji
)
∀(i, j) ∈ N0 × N0 (8c)
i ̸= j
qij ≥ ζj − K
(
1 − xij
)
∀(i, j) ∈ N × N0 (8d)
i ̸= j
qi0 ≥ ζi − K(1 − xi0) ∀i ∈ N0. (8e)
The battery weight between locations i and j is represented
by the decision variable qij in kg. To assist with optimizing
the battery weight, the decision variable ζi tracks the battery
weight in kg at location i. The energy consumed from a drone’s
battery by the time it arrives at the depot directly after leaving
location i is z
i kJ. Note that zi = 0i f xi0 = 0, while zi > 0
otherwise. The constant ξ is the energy density of the battery
in kJ/kg. The capacity of the drone between locations i and j
is restricted to Q kg by ( 8a). The weight ζi of the battery at
each location i is set by ( 8b) and ( 8c): constraint ( 8b) ﬁnds
ζi for the locations visited just before the depot, while ( 8c)
sets ζi = ζj if the drone ﬂies directly from location i to loca-
tion j. The weight qij of the battery between locations i and j is
required by (8a) and is found through constraints (8d) and (8e).
Constraint ( 8d)s e t sqij ≥ ζj if the drone ﬂies between loca-
tions i and j, while ( 8e)s e t sqi0 ≥ ζi if the drone ﬂies from
location i to the depot.
Energy restrictions are enforced by
fi − fj + p(mij)
(
dij/v + τ
)
∀(i, j) ∈ N × N0 (9a)
≤ K
(
1 − xij
)
i ̸= j
fi − zi + p(mi0)(di0/v + τ) ∀i ∈ N0 (9b)
≤ K(1 − xi0)
zi ≤ Kxi0 ∀i ∈ N0. (9c)
The decision variable fi represents the energy in kJ consumed
from a drone’s current battery upon reaching location i ∈ N0.
The power p(m) in kW consumed by a drone with a battery
and payload weight of m kg is the linear approximation ( 3).
The weight in kg of the drone’s battery and payload between
locations i and j is m
ij = qij + yij. Constraint (9a) forces fi to
equal the total energy consumed along the route up to loca-
tion i. Constraint ( 9b) makes zi equal to the energy consumed
ﬂying the entire route that ends at location i. To ensure that
zi = 0 if the drone does not ﬂy from location i to the depot,
and that zi > 0 otherwise, we include ( 9c). Note that con-
straints ( 9a) and ( 9b) are linear because the power p(mij) is
the linear approximation ( 3).
Costs are kept in line with the budget B through
c = F
∑
i∈N0
x0i − F
∑
(i,j)∈N0×N0
i̸=j
σij + ϵ
∑
i∈N0
zi (10a)
c ≤ B. (10b)
The cost of a drone is F ﬁnancial units, while the budget
is limited to B ﬁnancial units. The constant ϵ is the cost in
ﬁnancial units of a kJ of energy. Constraint ( 10a) calculates
the total cost c of performing the deliveries. The leftmost term
of (10a) represents the cost of drones assuming that each route
requires a new drone, while the second term represents the
savings provided by reusing drones; together they equal the
total cost of drones. The rightmost term is the cost of energy.
The total cost is restricted to the budget by ( 10b).
The constraints in this section assume each drone’s battery is
sized to provide exactly enough energy for the upcoming route.
The constraints can, however, be adjusted to ﬁnd the optimum
combination of discrete battery sizes. Assume a set of battery
types B exists, where each battery type j ∈ B has energy E
j
in kJ, a cost Cj in ﬁnancial units, a weight wj in kg, and a
decision variable bji that is 1 if battery type j is in the drone
at location i with zi ≥ 0, and 0 otherwise. In ( 8b), the contin-
uous battery weight zi/ξ at location i can be replaced with the
weight of the chosen batteries ∑
j∈B wjbji.I n( 10a), the con-
tinuous total cost ϵ ∑
i∈N0 zi of batteries can be replaced with
the total cost of the chosen batteries ∑
i∈N0
∑
j∈B Cjbji.T o
ensure that the chosen batteries’ energy is adequate, constraint∑
j∈B Ejbji ≥ zi,∀i ∈ N0 can be added.
C. Mixed Integer Linear Program Formulation
This section provides MILP formulations of the DDPs.
As both problems have identical decision variables and con-
straints, only their objective functions differ. By representing
the problems in MILP form, we show that while the prob-
lems are nonconvex, they are compatible with commercial MIP
solvers such as CPLEX [ 19].
The MT-DDP can be expressed as
min l (11)
s.t. ( 4a) ··· (10b).
The objective function ( 11) minimizes the overall delivery
time l. According to ( 7d), the overall delivery time is equal to
the time of the last package delivery.
The MC-DDP can be expressed as
min c (12)
s.t. ( 4a) ··· (10b).
The objective function ( 12) minimizes the total cost c, and
therefore, according to ( 10a), the cost of drones and energy.
Both DDPs are nonconvex as they contain binary decision
variables. However, the objective functions ( 11), (12) and the
constraints (4a)–(10b), are all linear functions of the decision
variables. This means the DDPs are MILPs compatible with
most MIP solvers.
While MIP solvers ﬁnd optimal solutions, the runtime can
be large, even for problems with a small number of locations.
In Section V, we propose an SA approach similar to the one
in [18] for ﬁnding suboptimal solutions to the problem under
limited runtimes.
V. S
IMULATED ANNEALING IMPLEMENTATION
Even for scenarios with a small number of locations, the
time required to solve the MILP implementation of the DDPs
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
76 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017
Algorithm 1 COST(s,/Phi1 )Method
Input:
s - The solution vector
/Phi1- A boolean variable that is 1 if the goal is to minimize
cost, or 0 to minimize overall delivery time
Output:
c - The total cost of s
l - The time taken by s to complete deliveries
// Find the cost of energy λ, the cost γ of drones, the overall
// delivery time l, and the total cost c.
λ ← ENERGY COST (s)
(γ,l) ← DRONE COSTAND DELIVERY TIME(s,λ,/Phi1 )
c ← λ+ γ
// Enforce budget and delivery time limit by increasing cost
// and overall delivery time if either constraint is violated.
if c > B then
c ← c + K(c − B)
l ← l + K(c − B)
else if l > T then
c ← c + K(l − T)
l ← l + K(l − T)
return (c, l)
to optimality may be prohibitively long. Under time con-
straints, a suboptimal solution may be preferable. In this
section, we create a function for determining the cost and
overall delivery time of a DDP solution. This cost function
takes into account the cost and weight of batteries, the payload
weight of each drone, and the fact that each drone can perform
multiple trips. To solve practical problems with large numbers
of locations, we apply it to an SA [ 36] heuristic similar to the
algorithms in [ 18] and [ 37].
We take a string-based approach, meaning that a DDP
solution is represented as a 1-D vector of whole numbers
s = [0 r
1 0 r2 0 ... rR 0], where, as described in [ 37],
the number 0 represents the depot, rn represents a route ﬂown
by a drone, and R is the number of routes. The variable rn is
a vector whose kth element rnk ∈ N , where N is the set of
locations. The routes in Fig. 2 could, for example, be repre-
sented by the string s = [ 0123000891 0045670 ] .
When two neighboring zeros occur, there is an empty route;
a total of three routes exist in the above s, even though ﬁve
could have been ﬂown. Reference [ 37, Sec. 2.3] discusses the
string-based model and its advantages in greater detail.
The rest of this section is dedicated to explaining our SA
implementation. To decide whether one solution is an improve-
ment over another, we compare their costs. The method we use
to determine the cost of a solution is presented in Section V-A.
Finally, the SA algorithm is discussed in Section V-B.
A. DDP Cost Function
The cost of a set of routes depends on the type of DDP being
solved. In the MT-DDP the best solution has the lowest overall
delivery time, while in the MC-DDP the best solution has the
lowest cost. In this section, we create a function for calculating
the cost and overall delivery time of a DDP solution.
Algorithm 2 ENERGY COST(s) Method
Input:
s - The solution vector
Output:
λ - The cost of energy for solution s
// Initialize the time t, sum-of-products ω of time and weight,
// payload weight y, and energy cost λ.
t ← 0
ω ← 0
y ← 0
λ ← 0
// Iterate through the locations in s from back to front.
for k ∈{ LENGTH (s)-2... 0} do
// Set the next location i and current location j.
i ← s
k+1
j ← sk
if i ̸= 0 ∨ j ̸= 0 then
// Record the travel time φij between i and j.
φij ← τ+ dij/v
// Update the time, the sum-of-products of time and
// weight, and the payload weight respectively.
t ← t + φ
ij
ω ← ω + yφij
y ← y + Dj
// Update costs when a vehicle arrives at a depot.
if (0 == j) ∧ (i ̸= 0) then
E ← BATTERY ENERGY (t,ω )
// Add the cost of energy. Note that ϵ is the cost
// of a kJ. Greatly increase the cost if the positive
// energy constraint is violated.
if E > 0 then
λ ← λ+ Eϵ
else
λ ← λ+− K(Eϵ)
// Enforce the capacity constraint by greatly
// increasing cost if the drone carries too much.
if y + E/ξ >Q then
λ ← λ+ K(y + E/ξ− Q)
// Reset weight and time values for the next route.
t ← 0
ω ← 0
y ← 0
return λ
We assume that violating the capacity constraint, budget
constraint, or delivery time limit is costly. As in [ 18], we
reduce the likelihood of accepting a solution that violates a
constraint by penalizing it; we do so by greatly increasing the
cost and overall delivery time. The constant K can be adjusted
to reﬂect the actual costs of violating a constraint.
Algorithm 1 calculates the overall cost and delivery time
of a solution s to the DDP. It takes the solution vector s and
a boolean value /Phi1that is 1 for the MC-DDP and 0 for the
MT-DDP as inputs. The algorithm is divided into two phases:
the ﬁrst phase calculates the cost of energy with Algorithm 2,
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
DORLING et al.: VRPs FOR DRONE DELIVERY 77
Algorithm 3 ROUTE DELIVERY ANDARRIV ALTIMES (s) Method
Input:
s - The solution vector
Output:
u - A vector containing pairs of the delivery and arrival
times for each route
// Initialize the delivery time h and arrival time a to 0.
h ← 0
a ← 0
// Initialize the route timing vector u to ∅.
u ←∅
// Iterate through the locations in s from front to back.
for k ∈{ 1... LENGTH (s) −1} do
// Set the current location i and previous location j.
i ← s
k
j ← sk−1
if i ̸= 0 ∨ j ̸= 0 then
// Update the time variables.
h ← a
φij ← τ+ dij/v
a ← a + φij
// Add the delivery and arrival time to u.
if i == 0 ∧ j ̸= 0 then
u ← u ∪ (h, a)
// Reset the delivery time value.
a ← 0
return u
while the second ﬁnds the cost of drones and the overall deliv-
ery time with Algorithm 5. Later in this section we show that
Algorithm 2 has a O(|N0|) bound, and Algorithm 5 has a
O(|N0| log2 M) bound, where |N0| is the number of locations
in the area of interest, and M is the maximum number of
drones that can be purchased. This means that Algorithm 1
has a O(|N0| log2 M) bound as well. The rest of this section
discusses Algorithms 2–5.
Algorithm 2 ﬁnds the cost of energy by iterating over the
solution vector s. It iterates from back to front, like the cost
function in [18, Fig. A2]; if it went from front to back, it would
have to calculate the initial value of payload weight y before
iterating over a route, instead of setting y = 0. Algorithm 2
calls B ATTERY ENERGY (t,ω ) to ﬁnd the energy
E =
b−1∑
k=a
p(yk(k+1) + E/ξ)φk(k+1)
= α∑b−1
k=a yk(k+1)φk(k+1) + β∑b−1
k=a φk(k+1)
1 − (α/ξ)∑b−1
k=a φk(k+1)
= αω + βt
1 − (α/ξ)t (13)
in kJ required by a drone to complete a route containing loca-
tions a to b. Note that t is the time taken to complete a
route, ω is the sum-of-products of the travel time and pay-
load weight between locations, yij is the payload weight in
kg between locations i and j, p(m) is ( 3), α is the power in
Algorithm 4 LIST SCHEDULE (u, n) Method
Input:
u - A vector containing pairs of delivery and arrival times
for each route
n - The number of drones that can be assigned routes
Output:
l - The overall delivery time when the routes are assigned
to n drones
// Apply the list scheduling algorithm to assign routes to
// drones. Initialize the drone timing vector κ.
κ ←∅
for i ∈{ 0... n − 1} do
κ ← κ∪ (0, 0)
// Go through every route in the route timing vector u.
for i ∈{ 0...
LENGTH (u)−1} do
// Get the delivery and arrival times of the drone with
// the smallest arrival time. Then assign route i to that
// drone.
(h
′, a′) ← POP MINIMUM ARRIV ALTIME ELEMENT (κ)
(h, a) ← ui
INSERT ELEMENT (κ,( a′ + h, a′ + a))
// Return the maximum delivery time in κ.
return MAXIMUM DELIVERY TIME (κ)
kW consumed per kg of battery and payload weight, β is the
power in kW required to keep the drone in hover assuming
no battery or payload weight, ξ is the battery energy density
in kJ/kg, and φ
ij is the travel time in seconds between loca-
tions i and j. As Algorithm 2 iterates through s once, its bound
is O(|N0|).
Algorithm 2 assumes that battery weight and cost can be
sized to provide the exact amount of energy required. If it is
preferable to combine discrete battery sizes instead, it can be
shown that ﬁnding the optimal combination of batteries that
minimizes cost while providing enough energy to complete the
route is a minimum knapsack problem [ 38]. Let B represent
a set of battery types, where each battery type j ∈ B has a
weight w
j in kg, energy Ej in kJ, and cost Cj in ﬁnancial units.
Given a decision variable bj that is 1 if battery type j is used,
and 0 otherwise, while letting Y = Ej − α∑b−1
k=a wjφk(k+1) and
Z = α∑b−1
k=a yk(k+1)φk(k+1) + β∑b−1
k=a φk(k+1), the minimum
knapsack problem is
min
∑
j∈B
Cjbj
s.t.
∑
j∈B
Ybj ≥ Z. (14)
The values E, Eϵ, and E/ξ in Algorithm 2 can be replaced
with ∑
j∈B Ejbj, ∑
j∈B Cjbj, and ∑
j∈B wjbj, respectively, after
solving (14).
To calculate the overall delivery time, we require the deliv-
ery time and arrival time of each route, which can be found
with Algorithm 3. The delivery time is when the last delivery
along a route is made, while the arrival time is when the drone
arrives at the depot after completing the route. Route timing
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
78 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017
Algorithm 5 DRONE COSTANDDELIVERY TIME(s,λ,/Phi1)Method
Input:
s - The solution vector
λ - The cost of energy for solution s
/Phi1- A boolean variable that is 1 if the goal is to minimize
drone cost, or 0 to minimize overall delivery time
Output:
γ - The cost of drones
l - The overall delivery time
// Get the vector u, which contains pairs of delivery and
// arrival times for each route.
u ← R
OUTE DELIVERY ANDARRIV ALTIMES (s)
// Perform a binary search to ﬁnd the best number of
// drones n when minimizing cost.
if /Phi1then
// Set the lower and upper bounds ϕ and ψ , respectively,
// where M is the maximum number of drones available.
ϕ ← 1
ψ ← M
while ϕ ≤ ψ − 1 do
n ←⌊ ϕ +
ψ−ϕ
2 ⌋
if LIST SCHEDULE (u, n) ≤ T then
ψ ← n
else
ϕ ← n + 1
n ← ϕ
if LIST SCHEDULE (u, n) > T then
n ← ψ
else
// Purchase as many drones as possible to minimize time,
// given a budget B and a cost F of a single drone.
n ←⌊
B−λ
F ⌋
// Make sure number of drones is positive.
if n < 1 then
n ← 1
// Find the cost of drones γ and the overall delivery time l.
γ ← nF
l ← L
IST SCHEDULE (u, n)
return (γ,l)
vector u contains pairs of delivery and arrival times for each
route, such that element ui = (hi, ai), where hi is the deliv-
ery time and ai is the arrival time for route i. Algorithm 3
implements R OUTE DELIVERY ANDARRIV ALTIMES (s), which
iterates over the solution s to calculate u. As Algorithm 3
iterates through s once, it has a O(|N0|) bound.
To minimize the overall delivery time, we require a method
of assigning R routes to n drones; this method is given in
Algorithm 4. This problem is equivalent to the load balanc-
ing problem in computer science, where j jobs are assigned to
m machines to minimize the maximum load of the machines.
This problem is NP-hard, so we apply the list scheduling,
or greedy-balance, algorithm discussed in [ 39, Sec. 11.1],
except jobs become routes, machines become drones, and we
try to minimize the maximum delivery time of the drones.
Fig. 3. Exchange rules from [ 37, Sec. 2.4]. (a) Swap. (b) Relocate. (c) 2-opt.
Algorithm 4 implements LIST SCHEDULE (u, n) to approximate
the minimum overall delivery time. At most M drones can be
purchased, and the number of elements in u cannot exceed
the number of locations |N0|. Drone timing vector κ contains
pairs of delivery and arrival times for each route, such that
element κi = (hi, ai). Assuming that κ is implemented as a
binary heap, the bound of Algorithm 4 is O(|N0| log M).
Alternatives to list scheduling, such as the longest process-
ing time (LPT), or sorted-balance, algorithm discussed in [ 39]
could be applied. LPT improves list scheduling by choos-
ing the jobs to assign based on a speciﬁc order, such as by
descending runtime, resulting in a better performance guaran-
tee of 1.5 instead of 2. The order of the route delivery and
arrival times in u depend on the order of the routes in s.T h e
SA algorithm randomly adjusts s: in addition to changing the
routes themselves, it also changes their order. As the SA algo-
rithm is already adjusting the order of the routes, we choose
not to implement LPT.
Algorithm 5 implements the D
RONE COSTAND DELIVERY -
TIME(s,λ,/Phi1 )method, where λ is the cost of energy, to
calculate the cost of drones γ and the overall delivery time l.
When solving the MC-DDP, it performs a binary search to
reduce the number of drones n as much as possible, with-
out violating the delivery time constraint. While solving the
MT-DDP, on the other hand, it sets n as high as possible
without violating the budget constraint. After ﬁnding n, and
in turn γ,i tu s e sA l g o r i t h m4 to ﬁnd l. As Algorithm 5
performs a binary search to ﬁnd the number of drones, call-
ing Algorithm 4 every iteration, it has a O(|N0| log2 M)
bound.
B. Simulated Annealing Algorithm
Algorithm 6 provides the SA algorithm we use. It requires
an initial temperature ϒ0, ﬁnal temperature ϒ′, cooling fac-
tor μ, and the number of rounds /Lambda1per cooling phase. It
is based on the approach discussed in [ 37, Sec. 2.5], with
slight modiﬁcations. We do not include the heating phase, and
instead let ϒ0 be an input to the algorithm. We use Algorithm1
to compare the costs of different solutions.
In Algorithm 6, the exchange rules are used to ﬁnd a
neighboring solution s′ from the current solution s.T h et h r e e
exchange rules in [ 37, Sec. 2.4] are applied in Algorithm 6,
each using two uniform randomly selected indices. The swap
rule in Fig. 3(a) swaps two randomly selected elements in the
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
DORLING et al.: VRPs FOR DRONE DELIVERY 79
Algorithm 6 SIMULATED ANNEALING (ϒ0,ϒ ′,μ,/Lambda1 )Method
Input:
ϒ0 - The initial temperature
ϒ′ - The ﬁnal temperature
μ - The amount that temperature is adjusted each iteration
/Lambda1- The number of adjustments to the solution attempted
per iteration
Output:
s - A solution to the DDP
// Generate a random solution to the DDP using the number
// of locations |N0|. It can be infeasible at this point.
s ← RANDOM SOLUTION (|N0|)
// Set the current temperature ϒ to the initial temperature
// ϒ0.
ϒ ← ϒ0
// Perform annealing on the current solution s.
while ϒ>ϒ ′ do
ϒ ← μϒ
for k ∈{ 1.../Lambda1} do
// Pick two random indices for s.
i ← UNIFORM RANDOM INTEGER (1,LENGTH (s)-1)
j ← UNIFORM RANDOM INTEGER (1,LENGTH (s)-1)
// Choose a random exchange rule R, then adjust s.
R ← UNIFORM RANDOM INTEGER (1,3)
s′ ← ADJUST WITH EXCHANGE RULE (s, R, i, j)
// Use Metropolis algorithm to determine if the
// adjustment should become the current solution.
X ← U
NIFORM RANDOM FLOAT(0,1)
if exp
(
− COST(s′)− COST(s)
ϒ
)
≥ X then
s ← s′
return s
vector, the relocate rule in Fig. 3(b) changes the position of a
randomly selected element in the vector, while the 2-opt rule
in Fig. 3(c) reverses a randomly chosen subvector. Note that
the vectors in Fig. 3 represent the solution vector s, whose ele-
ments are the locations in the area of interest. To determine if
the neighboring solution should become the current one, we
apply the Metropolis algorithm [ 40].
Section VI compares the performance of the MILP imple-
mentations to the SA implementations to validate the cost
function and demonstrate that the SA implementation can ﬁnd
near-optimal solutions to small DDP instances. One weak-
ness of the SA approach is that it does not take advantage of
characteristics unique to VRPs. For example, it does not take
advantage of geographical information to reduce the likelihood
of connecting distant locations, even though a route contain-
ing such locations would likely be infeasible. It also does not
keep track of how often the swap, relocate, and 2-opt oper-
ations improve the solution, which could be used to increase
the frequency of operations that are more likely to improve the
solution. While heuristics that implement these approaches can
likely ﬁnd better solutions than SA given the same runtime, we
do not believe it is likely that the trends observed in Section VI
will change signiﬁcantly with the heuristic. The trends can be
explained by adjustments made to parameters such as area size
and the number of customer locations in an area, and do not
appear to be a result of behavior speciﬁc to SA.
VI. R
ESULTS
In this section, we validate the multirotor helicopter energy
consumption model, and analyze the performance of the MILP
and SA implementations of the DDPs. We demonstrate that
the SA implementations ﬁnd near-optimal solutions to small
instances of the DDPs, and provide consistent results for larger
instances. We show that the cost found by the MC-DDP has an
inverse exponential relationship with the delivery time limit,
and that the overall delivery time found by the MT-DDP has an
inverse exponential relationship with the budget. We demon-
strate that the majority of costs go toward drones, and that
changing the budget or delivery time limit causes the SA DDPs
to adjust the number of drones while leaving energy costs
approximately constant. We demonstrate that reusing drones
to perform multiple trips is an important strategy for reduc-
ing costs. Our results indicate that optimizing battery weight
is an effective strategy for reducing the total cost and overall
delivery time.
To understand how the DDPs behave in general, we aver-
age the results of a number of randomly generated instances of
each scenario. Each scenario has an area size of 0.25 or 1 km
2.
Small scenarios have 6–8 delivery locations, while large sce-
narios have 125 or 500 delivery locations. We generate 50
random instances for each scenario. In each instance, delivery
locations are uniformly distributed throughout the area and are
given uniform random demands of 0.5–2 kg; depots are located
in the middle of the area. We run the SA algorithm 20 times
per instance, and calculate the minimum, mean, standard devi-
ation, and average runtime of these 20 runs. The minimums,
means, etc., in this section are averaged over all 50 instances
of each scenario. Unless mentioned otherwise, we use the aver-
age minimum values in tables and graphs. We run the MILP
implementation once per instance, and provide the average
result and runtime over all 50 instances of a scenario. Unless
mentioned otherwise, when running the SA algorithm, the ini-
tial temperature ϒ
0 = 1, the ﬁnal temperature ϒ′ = 0.001, the
cooling factor μ = 0.99, and the number of rounds /Lambda1= 1000.
We assume that each drone costs F = $500 and has a max-
imum carrying capacity of Q = 3 kg. Its maximum carrying
capacity includes its battery and payload weight, but not its
frame weight. Drones can vary in price from under $100 for
basic models to tens of thousands of dollars for industrial
or military use. We assume that the operator either manu-
factures its own drones, or uses a hobbyist drone to make
deliveries, hence the $500 cost. A carrying capacity of 3 kg
should be possible for drones designed to deliver small pack-
ages. We assign a slope α = 0.217 kW/kg and a y-intercept
β = 0.185 kW to the energy consumption model, based on
results obtained from the hexacopter power consumption mea-
surements made in Section VI-A. When delivering packages,
we assume that the drone ﬂies at a constant speed of v = 6m / s
between locations, and takes τ = 60 s at each location to
descend, deliver the package, and ascend. Batteries are given
an energy density of ξ = 650 kJ/kg and cost ϵ = 0.1$ / k J ,
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
80 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017
based on the energy density and price of lithium polymer
batteries in U.S. dollar values at the time this paper was
written.
We use the percent improvement p to compare how a value
changes from x to x
′ after adjusting a parameter or algorithm.
We express the percent improvement as
p = x − x′
x′ . (15)
We either minimize the cost or the overall delivery time, so
when p > 0, x′ is an improvement over x.
The rest of this section is organized as follows. SectionVI-A
validates our energy consumption model by comparing it to
measurements from a 3D Robotics ArduCopter Hexa-B hexa-
copter. Section VI-B compares the results and runtimes of the
MILP and SA DDP implementations for instances with 6–8
locations, and measures the consistency and runtimes of the
SA DDPs for instances of up to 500 locations. Section VI-C
examines how the cost and overall delivery time found by the
MC-DDP and MT-DDP, respectively, change with the deliv-
ery time limit, budget, area size, and number of locations.
Section VI-C also examines how the DDPs adjust costs for
different delivery time limits and budgets. Section VI-D inves-
tigates the importance of reusing drones, while Section VI-E
looks into the advantages of optimizing battery weight.
A. Hexacopter Energy Consumption Measurements
In this section, we conduct two experiments to validate our
energy consumption model. In the ﬁrst experiment we verify
that the power consumed during hover, level ﬂight, and chang-
ing altitude is, on average, approximately equal. The second
experiment veriﬁes that the relationship between power con-
sumption and battery and payload weight is approximately
linear, and provides us with realistic values for our linear
model.
Experimental results were generated with a 3D Robotics
ArduCopter Hexa-B hexacopter. It has six 850 RPM/V motors
with 10 × 4.7 APC slow ﬂy propellers, uses an Arduino ﬂight
controller with ﬁrmware version 3.0.1 of the APM 2.5 autopi-
lot, and has a u-blox LEA-6 GPS with a ceramic 4 mm GPS
patch antenna. Unless mentioned otherwise, the hexacopter is
powered by a 4-cell 14.8 V lithium polymer battery. Power
consumption is calculated using current and voltage readings
taken from the hexacopter’s power management system, which
were recorded by the ArduPilot mission planning software.
Power consumption was measured during level ﬂight, hover,
and altitude changes. The ArduPilot software under default
settings was used to control the hexacopter and log the
measurements. During level ﬂight, the drone ﬂew six times
between two waypoints positioned about 94 m apart, with an
average speed of about 6 m/s; the path can be seen in Fig. 4(a).
During hover, the hexacopter remained as stationary as it could
over a single location over a period of 40 s. During altitude
changes, the hexacopter’s altitude changed as in Fig. 4(b), with
minimal changes in latitude and longitude.
Table I contains the average voltage, current, and power
consumption during hover, level ﬂight, and altitude adjustment.
Fig. 4. Hexacopter maneuver information. (a) Hexacopter path during the
straight ﬂight maneuver. Map data and image by Google. (b) Hexacopter
altitude while performing altitude changes.
TABLE I
A
VERAGE VOLTAGE ,C URRENT , AND POWER CONSUMED BY THE
HEXACOPTER WHILE PERFORMING DIFFERENT MANEUVERS
Fig. 5. Hexacopter energy consumption for various battery and payload
weights m, with corresponding energy consumption model values.
It shows that, on average, the power consumed when perform-
ing the three maneuvers is approximately equal. The current is
slightly lower during level ﬂight, possibly due to translational
lift, where air moving horizontally along the rotors creates
extra lift. The voltages in Table I are slightly different between
tests, depending on the battery charge remaining. The altitude
change tests had slightly lower voltages because they were
conducted last.
The second set of experiments measure the power con-
sumption of the hexacopter as it carries different weights,
while hovering 3–5 m above the ground at the same location.
Measurements were repeated twice for each weight and bat-
tery type. The hexacopter was tested with both a 3-cell 11.1 V
lithium polymer battery and a 4-cell 14.8 V lithium polymer
battery.
Fig. 5 conﬁrms that the power consumption of the hexa-
copter varies approximately linearly with battery and payload
weight, for both 3- and 4-cell batteries. The power consumed
by the 4-cell battery grows faster with weight than with the
3-cell battery because we used 10 × 4.7 slow ﬂy propellers,
which perform less efﬁciently at the higher motor RPM from
using the 4-cell batteries.
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
DORLING et al.: VRPs FOR DRONE DELIVERY 81
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF MILP AND SA I MPLEMENTATIONS
OF THE MT-DDP
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE OF MILP AND SA I MPLEMENTATIONS
OF THE MC-DDP
B. Performance of MILP and SA Implementations
This section analyzes the performance of the MILP and
SA implementations of the DDPs. It compares the results and
runtimes of the SA implementations with the MILP implemen-
tations, and examines how the SA implementations perform at
different cooling rate levels. The MILP implementations were
run in CPLEX in a single thread, otherwise with default set-
tings. Each scenario has its own number of locations |N
0|, not
including the depot, and area size A in km2.
Tables II and III show the average results and runtimes
of the MILP and SA implementations of the MT-DDP and
MC-DDP, respectively. The SA algorithm parameters are set
to ϒ0 = 1, ϒ′ = 0.001, μ = 0.9, and /Lambda1= 1000. MT-DDP
scenarios have a budget B of $1500, while MC-DDP scenarios
have delivery time limits T of 10 min.
The SA implementation consistently ﬁnds near-optimal
solutions for problems with eight or less locations. SA solu-
tions to the MT-DDP are at most seconds away from optimal,
while SA solutions to the MC-DDP are at most tens of dollars
away, when optimal solutions are in minutes and thousands of
dollars, respectively. While optimality cannot be guaranteed
when using SA, it appears to be an effective approach for
solving small cases of the DDPs, providing similar results in
under a second of runtime.
The runtime of the MILP implementation can grow expo-
nentially with the number of locations, as can be observed
from the runtimes in Tables II and III. In Table III, for exam-
ple, the runtime increases from 75.38 to 1116.87 s when
solving an eight location problem with an area of 0.25 km
2
instead of a seven location problem. The runtime of the
SA implementation is consistently about 0.2–0.3 s for each
scenario.
In Tables II and III, increasing A without changing |N0|
can actually cause the runtime of the MILP implementation
to decrease. Locations are further apart, reducing the number
TABLE IV
SA R ESULTS FOR THE MT-DDP
TABLE V
SA R ESULTS FOR THE MC-DDP
of feasible routes and consequently the number of feasible
solutions. Perhaps the solver improves the runtime by pruning
solutions with routes that consume too much energy, carry too
much weight, exceed the delivery time limit, or fail to meet
some other criteria.
Tables IV and V show the results of the SA implementation
at different cooling rate levels μ for scenarios with over 125
locations. As before, ϒ
0 = 1, ϒ′ = 0.001, and /Lambda1= 1000.
The cooling rate level μ, however, is adjusted this time to
see how much the results improve with additional runtime.
MT-DDP scenarios have a budget B of $10 000, while MC-
DDP scenarios have delivery time limits T of 10 min.
The SA implementation results are consistent for large sce-
narios. In Table IV, the standard deviations are generally in
seconds when the mean values are several minutes long. The
standard deviation is always under $1500 in Table V, and usu-
ally just a few hundred dollars, where the means are often tens
of thousands of dollars. The standard deviations are greatest
when |N0| is high and μ is low. In this case the solution vec-
tor s is long, increasing the number of neighboring solutions
that can be found after an adjustment, and μ is low so the
temperature decreases rapidly, giving fewer opportunities to
make adjustments.
One possible reason for the small standard deviation is that
the majority of costs appear to come from purchasing drones,
which are considerably more expensive than energy. It seems
like the SA DDPs consistently ﬁnd similar numbers of drones,
and differ more with regards to energy consumption. The vari-
ation in energy consumption is dampened by the relatively low
energy costs, leading to the low standard deviations.
Increasing the cooling rate level from 0.9 to 0.99 resulted
in percent improvements of up to 15% for the means in the
scenarios tested, which came at the cost of increasing runtime
by about a factor of 10. Even though increasing the cooling
rate level generally improves results, the improvement is not
signiﬁcant compared to the increase in runtime. While not
shown in this paper, increasing μ from 0.99 to 0.999 resulted
in percent improvements of up to 5%, again with the runtime
increasing by about a factor of 10. We therefore set μ = 0.99
for the rest of this section, as further increasing μ would result
in minor improvements compared to the increase in runtime.
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
82 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017
Fig. 6. Costs found by the SA MC-DDP algorithm for various delivery time
limits, area sizes, and numbers of nodes.
We would like to mention that heuristics or exact algorithms
that take advantage of characteristics unique to VRPs may ﬁnd
lower costs and times than the SA approach in this paper. An
approach that takes advantage of geographical information to
reduce the likelihood of connecting far apart locations would
likely ﬁnd better results as fewer infeasible routes would be
tested. The number of times that performing operations such as
swap, relocate, or 2-opt improve the solution could be tracked;
operations which tend to improve the solution could be chosen
more frequently than operations that do not.
While such approaches may lower cost, we do not believe
that the trends we observed will change signiﬁcantly with
a different method. The trends can be explained by adjust-
ments made to parameters such as area size and the number
of customer locations in an area. They do not appear to be a
result of behavior speciﬁc to SA.
C. Analysis of DDP Parameters
This section examines how adjusting the budget B in dollars,
time limit T in minutes, number of locations |N
0|, and area
size A in km 2 affects the results obtained by the SA imple-
mentations of the DDPs. We show that the overall delivery
time l found by the MT-DDP is inversely proportional to B,
and that the cost c found by the MC-DDP is inversely propor-
tional to T. We also examine the sensitivity of the DDPs to
changes in B, T, |N0|, and A. This information may be used to
ﬁnd the point where guaranteeing a better delivery time limit
is not worth the additional cost, or alternatively the point at
which reducing the budget is not worth the increase in overall
delivery time.
Fig. 6 shows how adjustments to T, |N
0|, and A affect c,
while Fig. 7 examines how adjustments to B, |N0|, and
A affect l. To help explain the changes to l and c,
Figs. 8(a) and (b) provide stacked bar graphs depicting the
split in c between drones and energy for scenarios with 500
locations in a 1 km 2 area.
Fig. 6 shows an inverse exponential relationship between
c and T. Changes to c from adjusting T are larger when T
is low; from Fig. 8(a) we can see that this change comes
mostly from adding or removing drones. When T is low, most
drones ﬂy short routes and are seldom reused; as T increases,
drone reuse and route length increase, while the number of
routes decreases. This combination of factors reduces the
Fig. 7. Overall delivery times found by the SA MT-DDP algorithm for
various budgets, area sizes, and numbers of nodes.
Fig. 8. Costs found by the SA algorithms for various delivery time limits and
budgets, with 500 locations in a 1 km 2 area. (a) MC-DDP cost breakdown.
(b) MT-DDP cost breakdown.
number of purchased drones. After a certain point, increas-
ing T does not alter the routes as much, meaning costs
are mainly reduced by reusing drones. The greater reduc-
tions in cost for low delivery times likely come from not
only being able to reuse drones, but also from increasing
the length and consequently reducing the number of routes
ﬂown.
Fig. 7 shows an inverse exponential relationship between l
and B. Changes to l from adjusting B are greater when B is
low. From Fig. 8(b), we can see that, as with the MC-DDP, this
change comes mostly from adding or removing drones. When
B is low, only a small number of drones can be purchased
to complete deliveries. Adding an additional drone reduces
the delivery time considerably; for example, suppose a single
drone is making all of the deliveries, then a second drone is
added. If their burden is shared as evenly as possible, l can
potentially be halved. Now suppose a large number of drones
are available, and another one is added. The routes of each
drone could perhaps be shortened slightly to give the additional
drone a new route, but this will likely not have anywhere near
the impact on l compared to adding a second drone when only
a single drone is making deliveries.
Figs. 6 and 7 show that when |N
0| is high, the MC-DDP
becomes more sensitive to changes in T, and the MT-DDP
becomes more sensitive to changes in B. For a given increase
in T with the MC-DDP, more routes can be extended and
additional drones can be reused when |N0| is high. Similarly,
increasing |N0| when T is low has a greater effect on cost than
increasing |N0| when T is high. When T is low, routes are
short and drones are reused less, so increasing |N0| requires
purchasing more drones than if T were high. For higher values
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
DORLING et al.: VRPs FOR DRONE DELIVERY 83
TABLE VI
MC-DDP C OSTS WHEN REUSE IS ENABLED AND DISABLED FOR
VARIOUS TIME LIMITS IN A 0.25 km 2 AREA WITH 500 N ODES
of |N0| with the MT-DDP, drones require more time to com-
plete deliveries, as they must travel further and spend more
time servicing locations. When B is low, only a small num-
ber of drones are available and must therefore be reused more
frequently, further increasing l.
From Figs. 6 and 7, we see that the DDPs are less sen-
sitive to changes in A than to changes in |N
0|. Increasing A
increases the distance traveled between locations, and conse-
quently the time and energy required to complete deliveries.
Changing |N0| not only increases the travel distance, but also
the time spent servicing locations, as well as the number of
deliveries that must be made. Changing |N0| therefore has a
greater effect on time and cost than A.
Note that these results may not hold for much higher val-
ues of A or |N0|.I f A or |N0| are so high that it becomes
impossible in some scenarios to avoid violating the capacity
constraint, cost constraint, or timing constraint, then the aver-
age price given by the SA algorithm could greatly increase. If
a constraint is violated, the SA algorithm makes that solution
undesirable by increasing its cost.
D. Effect of Drone Reuse
In the previous section, we learned that the majority of costs
come from purchasing drones. Unlike other VRPs that model
fuel consumption, the DDPs permit drones to be reused to per-
form multiple trips. To demonstrate the importance of allowing
drone reuse, we show that our SA implementation performs
better when drone reuse is permitted.
To look at the importance of drone reuse, we altered the
SA implementation in Section V-A by removing the binary
search in Algorithm 5, and setting the number of drones n to
the number of routes. Table VI compares the results of the
MC-DDP with and without drone reuse. We did not include a
similar table for the MT-DDP, as solutions could not be found
for budgets of $35 000 or less.
Table VI shows substantial gains when allowing drone
reuse. We can see that without reusing drones a limit of about
$113 000 is reached. By reusing drones, we can pass this limit
without exceeding the delivery time constraints.
Note that we are ignoring the cost of maintaining drones.
Flying fewer drones will likely increase maintenance costs
due to increasing the total time ﬂown per drone. New drones
are generally expensive, and worn components can presum-
ably be replaced quickly and relatively inexpensively, so
reducing the number of drones while increasing the costs
of labor and replacement parts is likely the less expensive
option.
Fig. 9. Costs found by the MC-DDP when every drone’s battery weighs b kg,
with a time limit of 30 min on a 1 km 2 ﬁeld with 500 nodes.
Fig. 10. Delivery times found by the MT-DDP when every drone’s battery
weighs b kg, with a budget of $10 000 on a 1 km
2 ﬁeld with 500 nodes.
E. Effect of Optimizing Battery Weight
While papers on minimizing fuel consumption do not reuse
drones, MTVRPs do. We are not aware of any MTVRPs that
try to optimize battery weight and therefore the energy given to
each drone. Instead, they may limit each drone’s travel distance
or travel time to a predeﬁned value. In this section, we apply
our energy model to an MTVRP, and ﬁx the battery weight
for every route to the same constant value b in kg. Similar to
limiting distance or time, the amount of energy that can be
consumed is limited. We show that optimizing battery weight
for each route may provide better costs and delivery times
compared to optimizing a ﬁxed battery weight that is identical
for each route. We also demonstrate that even if all routes share
an identical battery weight, optimizing it can still be important.
To look at the effect of optimizing battery weight, we altered
Algorithm 2 to assume that every path has an identical battery
weight of b kg. The energy in a battery is then ξb, where
ξ is the energy density of the battery in kJ/kg. Fig. 9 shows
the cost c found by the MC-DDP when assuming an identical
battery weight b for each route. The dashed line represents the
cost found by optimizing battery weights for each route with
the unaltered version of Algorithm 2; it is ﬂat because it does
not consider b.F i g .10 is similar, but for the overall delivery
time l found by the MT-DDP.
Figs. 9 and 10 demonstrate that optimizing battery weights
for each route to give drones exactly enough energy to com-
plete their upcoming routes can provide substantial savings
compared to optimizing a ﬁxed battery weight that is identi-
cal for every route. In Fig. 9, the percent improvement when
optimizing each route’s battery weight amounts to 13% com-
pared to assuming an identical battery weight of 0.3 kg for
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
84 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017
every route. In Fig. 10, the percent improvement of optimizing
each route’s battery weight amounts to about 22% compared
to assuming each route has a battery weight of 0.25 kg when
using the MT-DDP. Note that while optimizing battery weight
for each route provides savings compared to optimizing a ﬁxed
battery weight, it can be less effective with a small area size
or low number of nodes.
Even if the battery weight is identical for all routes, opti-
mizing it can improve cost and delivery time, as can be seen in
Figs. 9 and 10. Setting b to 0.3 kg instead of 0.5 kg provides
a percent improvement of 15% for the MC-DDP, and setting b
to 0.25 kg instead of 0.45 kg provides a percent improvement
of 80% for the MT-DDP.
VII. C
ONCLUSION
In this paper, we derived an energy consumption model for
multirotor drones, provided a linear approximation for it, and
veriﬁed the approximation experimentally. With this approxi-
mation we proposed the DDPs that minimize cost or delivery
time while considering battery weight, payload weight, and
drone reuse, and implemented them as MILPs. To solve prac-
tical scenarios with hundreds of locations, we proposed a
string-based SA algorithm for solving the DDPs.
Numerical results indicate that optimizing battery weight
and reusing drones are important considerations for drone
delivery. Optimizing battery weights resulted in percent
improvements of over 10% compared to solutions where each
drone had an identical battery weight. Even when drones had
an identical battery weight, optimizing that weight provided
a percent improvement of 80% for the MT-DDP in the sce-
nario considered in Section VI-E. In Section VI-D, reusing
drones led to costs in the tens of thousands of dollars, while
preventing drone reuse resulted in costs of approximately
$113 000.
When minimizing costs with the MC-DDP, an inverse expo-
nential relationship between the cost and the delivery time
limit was noticed. An inverse exponential relationship was
also seen between the overall delivery time and the budget
constraint with the MT-DDP. For both DDPs, the majority of
costs are allocated to drones instead of energy. This informa-
tion is useful for a practitioner. For example, reducing already
low delivery times can require a relatively large investment in
additional drones. Adding a single drone when the number of
drones is low can greatly reduce delivery times, while adding
a drone when the number of drones is high has a limited effect
in comparison.
One weakness of the SA algorithm is that it does not take
advantage of characteristics inherent to a VRP. For instance, it
does not take advantage of geographical information to reduce
the likelihood of trying infeasible routes with two locations at
opposite ends of the area of interest. The cost function of the
SA algorithm accounts for reusing drones, as well as the effect
of battery and payload weight on energy consumption, so it
could be applied to a heuristic better suited to VRPs. The
cost function itself is also an approximation, as it uses list
scheduling to assign drones to routes. Perhaps a multilayer
approach that optimizes routes and their assignment to drones
would perform better.
Additional strategies could be implemented to further
reduce costs and generalize the problem. Time windows could
be added to locations to ensure that packages are delivered
within a speciﬁc time. Multiple depots or recharging stations
could be studied as a method of extending the ﬂight dis-
tance of drones. While we treat cost and delivery time as
separate optimization objectives, a multiobjective optimiza-
tion problem could combine both. Maintenance costs could
be included when determining drone reuse. The performance
of the MILP and SA DDPs on a cloud service such as
Amazon Web Services [41] could be investigated. The runtime
or resources provided to the algorithms could be adjusted to
compare performance gains from increasing the service cost.
The DDPs have practical applications in delivery and emer-
gency response scenarios. They can plan routes and assign
drones to them in scenarios with tight budgets or time lim-
its. In a disaster response scenario, for example, the MT-DDP
could make the best use of a limited budget to optimize the
routes taken by a ﬂeet of drones to deliver food or medicine
to assigned locations as quickly as possible. Alternatively, a
delivery company could determine the budget necessary to
guarantee a minimum delivery time with the MC-DDP. The
SA implementations can be used to quickly predict delivery
times and plan budgets for drone-based delivery operations
with a large number of locations.
R
EFERENCES
[1] Amazon.com Inc. Amazon Prime Air . Accessed on Apr. 2, 2016.
[Online]. Available: www.amazon.com/primeair
[2] DHL International GmbH. (Sep. 2014). DHL Parcelcopter Launches
Initial Operations for Research Purposes . [Online]. Available:
http://www.dhl.com/en/press/releases/releases_2014/group/dhl_
parcelcopter_launches_initial_operations_for_research_purposes.html
[3] J. Stewart. (Aug. 2014). Google Tests Drone Deliveries in
Project Wing Trials , BBC, London, U.K. [Online]. Available:
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-28964260
[4] Aljazeera. (Feb. 2014). UAE to Use Drones for Citizen Services .
[Online]. Available: http://www.aljazeera.com/news/middleeast/2014/02/
uae-use-drones-government-services-20142121717319272.html
[5] C. Dillow. (May 2015). Meet Matternet, the Drone Delivery Startup
Thats Actually Delivering , Fortune, New York, NY , USA. [Online].
Available: http://fortune.com/2015/05/01/matternet-drone-delivery/
[6] P. Morgan, Carbon Fibers and Their Composites (Materials
Engineering). Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2005.
[7] C. Reiter. (Nov. 2013). BMW Makes Lone Shift to Carbon Fiber to
Gain Auto Edge, Bloomberg, New York, NY , USA. [Online]. Available:
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-11-14/bmw-makes-lone-
shift-to-carbon-ﬁber-to-gain-auto-edge
[8] T. Reddy, Linden’s Handbook of Batteries, 4th ed. New York, NY , USA:
McGraw-Hill, 2010.
[9] GPS.gov: Augmentation Systems. (Dec. 2015). National Coordination
Ofﬁce for Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing . [Online].
Available: http://www.gps.gov/systems/augmentations/
[10] S. Karpenko, I. Konovalenko, A. Miller, B. Miller, and D. Nikolaev,
“UA V control on the basis of 3D landmark bearing-only observations,”
Sensors, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 29802–29820, Nov. 2015.
[11] T. Merz and F. Kendoul, “Dependable low-altitude obstacle avoidance
for robotic helicopters operating in rural areas,” J. Field Robot., vol. 30,
no. 3, pp. 439–471, Apr. 2013.
[12] R. Carloni et al. , “Robot vision: Obstacle-avoidance techniques for
unmanned aerial vehicles,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. , vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 22–31, Dec. 2013.
[13] I. Bekmezci, O. K. Sahingoz, and ¸ S. Temel, “Flying ad-hoc networks
(FANETs): A survey,” Ad Hoc Netw. , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1254–1270,
May 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
DORLING et al.: VRPs FOR DRONE DELIVERY 85
[14] J. Li, Y . Zhou, and L. Lamont, “Communication architectures and pro-
tocols for networking unmanned aerial vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE GC
Wkshps, Atlanta, GA, USA, Dec. 2013, pp. 1415–1420.
[15] C. C. Murray and A. G. Chu, “The ﬂying sidekick traveling salesman
problem: Optimization of drone-assisted parcel delivery,” Transp. Res.
C Emerging Technol., vol. 54, pp. 86–109, May 2015.
[16] S. Erdo ˘gan and E. Miller-Hooks, “A green vehicle routing problem,”
Transp. Res. E Logistics Transp. Rev. , vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 100–114,
Jan. 2012.
[17] É. D. Taillard, G. Laporte, and M. Gendreau, “Vehicle routing with mul-
tiple use of vehicles,” J. Oper. Res. Soc., vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1065–1070,
Aug. 1995.
[18] Y . Xiao, Q. Zhao, I. Kaku, and Y . Xu, “Development of a fuel consump-
tion optimization model for the capacitated vehicle routing problem,”
Comput. Oper. Res., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1419–1431, Jul. 2012.
[19] International Business Machines Corporation. CPLEX Optimizer .
Accessed on Apr. 2, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.ibm.com/
software/commerce/optimization/cplex-optimizer/
[20] K. Sundar and S. Rathinam, “Algorithms for routing an unmanned aerial
vehicle in the presence of refueling depots,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci.
Eng., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 287–294, Jan. 2014.
[21] F. Guerriero, R. Surace, V . Loscrí, and E. Natalizio, “A multi-objective
approach for unmanned aerial vehicle routing problem with soft time
windows constraints,” Appl. Math. Model. , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 839–852,
Feb. 2014.
[22] J.-F. Cordeau, G. Laporte, M. W. Savelsbergh, and D. Vigo, “Chapter 6
vehicle routing,” in Transportation (Handbooks in Operations Research
and Management Science), vol. 14, C. Barnhart and G. Laporte, Eds.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2007, pp. 367–428.
[23] B. Eksioglu, A. V . Vural, and A. Reisman, “The vehicle routing problem:
A taxonomic review,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1472–1483,
Nov. 2009.
[24] M. Schneider, A. Stenger, and D. Goeke, “The electric vehicle-routing
problem with time windows and recharging stations,” Transp. Sci. ,
vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 500–520, Nov. 2014.
[25] G. Hiermann, J. Puchinger, S. Ropke, and R. F. Hartl, “The electric ﬂeet
size and mix vehicle routing problem with time windows and recharging
stations,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 252, no. 3, pp. 995–1018, Aug. 2016.
[26] B. Fleischmann, “The vehicle routing problem with multiple use of
the vehicles,” Working paper, Fachbereich Wirtschaftswissenschaften,
Universitaet Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 1990.
[27] N. Azi, M. Gendreau, and J.-Y . Potvin, “An adaptive large neighborhood
search for a vehicle routing problem with multiple routes,” Comput.
Oper. Res., vol. 41, pp. 167–173, Jan. 2014.
[28] D. Cattaruzza, N. Absi, D. Feillet, and T. Vidal, “A memetic algorithm
for the multi trip vehicle routing problem,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 236,
no. 3, pp. 833–848, Aug. 2014.
[29] M. Cheikh, M. Ratli, O. Mkaouar, and B. Jarboui, “A variable neigh-
borhood search algorithm for the vehicle routing problem with multiple
trips,” Electron. Notes Discrete Math. , vol. 47, pp. 277–284, Feb. 2015.
[30] F. Hernandez, D. Feillet, R. Giroudeau, and O. Naud, “Branch-and-price
algorithms for the solution of the multi-trip vehicle routing problem
with time windows,” Eur. J. Oper. Res. , vol. 249, no. 2, pp. 551–559,
Mar. 2016.
[31] ˙I. Kara, B. Y . Kara, and M. K. Yetis, “Energy minimizing vehi-
cle routing problem,” in Combinatorial Optimization and Applications
(LNCS 4616), A. Dress, Y . Xu, and B. Zhu, Eds. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2007, pp. 62–71.
[32] Japanese Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
(2009). Fuel Consumption and CO2 Emission of Passenger Cars .
[Online]. Available: http://www.mlit.
go.jp/common/000037099.pdf
[33] E. E. Zachariadis, C. D. Tarantilis, and C. T. Kiranoudis, “The
load-dependent vehicle routing problem and its pick-up and delivery
extension,” Transp. Res. B Meth. , vol. 71, pp. 158–181, Jan. 2015.
[34] J. G. Leishman, Principles of Helicopter Aerodynamics (Cambridge
Aerospace Series), 2nd ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press,
2002.
[35] J. R. Montoya-Torres, J. L. Franco, S. N. Isaza, H. F. Jiménez, and
N. Herazo-Padilla, “A literature review on the vehicle routing prob-
lem with multiple depots,” Comput. Ind. Eng. , vol. 79, pp. 115–129,
Jan. 2015.
[36] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi, “Optimization by simu-
lated annealing,” Science, vol. 220, no. 4598, pp. 671–680, May 1983.
[37] I. Kaku, Y . Xiao, and G. Xia, “The deterministic annealing algorithms
for vehicle routing problems,” Int. J. Smart Eng. Syst. Design ,v o l .5 ,
no. 4, pp. 327–339, 2003.
[38] H. Kellerer, U. Pferschy, and D. Pisinger, Knapsack Problems. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2004.
[39] J. Kleinberg and É. Tardos, Algorithm Design . Boston, MA, USA:
Addison-Wesley, 2011.
[40] N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller, and
E. Teller, “Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines,”
J. Chem. Phys. , vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1087–1092, Jun. 1953.
[41] Amazon Web Services Inc. (2016). Amazon Web Services . [Online].
Available: https://aws.amazon.com/
Kevin Dorling (S’14) received the B.S. degree in
computer engineering (with distinction) from the
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, in
2010, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering.
He was an Intern with Bell Labs, Alcatel-Lucent,
Stuttgart, Germany, in 2011 and 2013, focusing on
deployment techniques for wireless sensor networks.
In 2009, he was an Intern with CDL Systems,
Calgary, developing control station software for
unmanned vehicles. His current research interests
include wireless sensor networks, operations research, and communication
systems.
Jordan Heinrichs received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering (with distinction) from the
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, in
2016, with a focus on computer engineering.
He tested multicopters as a summer research stu-
dent in 2013. From 2014 to 2015, he was an
Intern with Lockheed Martin CDL Systems, Calgary,
AB, Canada, developing software for miniature
unmanned aerial vehicles. He is currently with
Hitachi ID Systems, Calgary, developing software
for identity management.
Geoffrey G. Messier (S’91–M’98) received the B.S.
degrees in electrical engineering and computer sci-
ence (with great distinction) from the University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada in 1996,
the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, in
1998, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and com-
puter engineering from the University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2004.
From 1998 to 2004, he was with Nortel Networks
CDMA Base Station Hardware Systems Design
Group, Calgary, responsible for radio channel propagation measurements
and simulating the physical layer performance of high-speed CDMA and
multiple antenna wireless systems. He is currently a Professor with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Calgary.
His research interests include data networks, physical layer communications,
and communications channel propagation measurements.
Sebastian Magierowski (S’93–M’04) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in
2004.
From 2004 to 2012, he served as an
Assistant/Associate Professor with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, after which he
joined the faculty of the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Lassonde
School of Engineering, York University, Toronto.
As part of his industrial experience in Nortel Networks, Mississauga, ON,
Canada, PMC-Sierra, Sunnyvale, CA, USA, and Protolinx Corporation,
Toronto, ON, Canada. He has researched on CMOS device modeling,
high-speed mixed-signal IC design, and data networks. His current research
interests include analog/digital CMOS circuit design, communication
systems, and biomedical instrumentation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: GUILIN UNIVERSITY OF ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on September 23,2026 at 04:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 